Why did Iran actually decide to go after
countries that did not attack them?
>> It relates to Iran's broader strategy.
Not only its strategy for surviving this
war, but its strategy for improving its
deterrence and reducing the possibility
of this happening again, a future
attacks. The The bigger scenario that
the Iranians are more concerned about is
a scenario where Iran turns into Lebanon
or Iran turns into Syria, a country that
you can just bomb, that Israel can just
bomb whenever it wants to.
They're very, very concerned about that
becoming the new status quo.
So, that is what's driving their
strategy. They want to restore
deterrence. And their way of doing that
is indicating to everyone,
the United States, Israel, the GCC, but
the entire world, that
attacking us is not worth it.
That we will respond by imposing more
pain, more costs on you than you can
impose on us. The Iranians love to
demonstrate this. They love to talk
about this, and I think they are
illustrating it, that they are more
resilient, that they can take the hit,
that it doesn't matter that the US and
Israel have air superiority over Iran.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
The Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> Tracy, we're recording this the morning
of March 19th around 9:00 a.m. and
>> That's how you know it's bad when you
have to throw in the hour and the
minutes, 9:07 a.m.
>> 9:07 a.m. And I think the story right
now is just the degree to which people
are re- realizing more and more energy
infrastructure in the region. We're
talking about the Iran war, of course.
More and more energy infrastructure in
the region. I mean, it's literally on
fire.
>> Yeah, um the thing that I've noticed
having recorded these sort of emergency
podcasts over the past, I guess, 2 weeks
now is that
we will talk about a hypothetical, like,
you know, oh, what happens if Iran
strikes the Port of Salalah in Oman? And
then a couple days later it happens,
which gives you an indication of how
quickly things are progressing. And one
thing that has happened in just the past
day or so since we recorded an episode
with Bob Bracket on Nat Gas is we had
Israel bombing Iran's um infrastructure
in the South Pars gas field, and that
was kind of a hypothetical that we
talked about with Bob. happened shortly
after. And then after that,
we also had Iran bombing Qatari energy
assets in the South Pars. So, it's
it's just um
progressing quickly.
>> Yes, that's right. Um our our colleague
Dylan Griffiths has put together a
really excellent list. I mean, the thing
was so we did that episode sort of near
the beginning or I've lost track of the
time with Rory Johnston. And he said the
closure of the Strait of Hormuz was
itself the sort of hypothetical that was
so extreme that it was almost not worth
contemplating. So, I think to you your
framing is really excellent. All of
these things that are just sort of like
you think about them as very bad
possibilities, and one by one they
become realities. Our colleague Dylan
Griffiths has a really excellent just
sort of list of energy infrastructure
damaged in Iran war piece, and it just
goes down through the list. One of the
refineries in the world shut down as a
precautionary measure. Uh Ras Tanura uh
a refinery in um Saudi Arabia halted.
Various pipelines, gas facilities, and
so forth. There's just a lot that's
damaged, which of course means that the
Strait of Hormuz is only one aspect.
Maybe it becomes maybe it gets opened,
but then there's of course the question
of like all the infrastructure that's
been damaged and how long it takes to
come back online at anything near full
capacity.
>> Right. And this raises two interesting
questions, I think. One is that it seems
like the US and maybe Israel to some
extent weren't expecting Iran to hit
back against various energy
infrastructure assets or even cities
this hard, right? And I think Trump has
said a couple of times that he didn't
expect Iran to for instance like go
after targets in the UAE and places like
that. So questions over what's happening
there, like why did that become a
strategy? And then secondly, the thing
I'm wondering is how much financial
pressure does this actually put on Iran?
Because at the moment, yes, some of its
big gas producing things are getting hit
and damaged and it seems like that's
going to cause some fallout. But on the
other hand, if oil prices are spiking
and if Iran can still get out some oil
to a certain extent to places like
China, does that is that actually a
fiscal windfall for them? Like can they
withstand some of this chaos uh better
than perhaps other places can?
>> Right. And you know, for the US,
obviously a lot of this translates into
higher prices at the pump. For some of
the region regioning Gulf countries, I
mean it's just it's GDP catastrophe,
right? And it's some of the estimates
for what some of the countries are
expected to see a reduction in GDP. I
think I've seen numbers like 15% etc. I
mean we're talking about you know,
that's depression level declines and so
forth. And so the degree to which this
drives a serious wedge between Gulf
countries and the United States is of
course obviously a big part of the story
here. Anyway, and of course that makes
the logic of the strikes, right? I mean
this is that makes the Iran's logic seem
very clear, drive a wedge between US and
its friends in the region and so forth.
And so anyway, we need to understand
both better just how serious this damage
is, the long-term fallout because this
is very important for me economic story,
and then the way to think about this
damage in the context of war strategy
itself and what constitutes success for
Iran here as it tries to defend itself.
>> all of this is actually playing on the
ground in Iran because of course we
don't have very good insight at any
moment into in time into domestic
Iranian politics.
>> Definitely not. All right, well we
really do have the perfect guest,
someone we've spoken to before, someone
we turn to frequently when the
discussion is about Iran or it's about
oil and certainly some combination of
the two. We're going to be speaking of
course perfect guest Greg Brew senior
analyst at Eurasia Group. He is the
author of two books that directly relate
to this, Petroleum and Progress in Iran,
Oil Development to the Cold War, and the
Struggle for Iran Oil Autocracy and the
Cold War. So uh Greg, thank you so much
for coming back on Odd Lots.
>> Hi Joe, hi Tracy. Thanks for having me
back.
>> It must be It must be nice, you know,
you write these academic books with
academic prices with names that sound
like academic books and suddenly
suddenly they're actually in demand.
They're
They're current events.
>> Suddenly they're relevant.
>> Which cannot be said for all academics.
>> They weren't relevant before. They were
very boring and only a handful of people
cared about them and now that and now
the number is slightly more than a
handful perhaps.
>> It's definitely more than a handful. Why
don't we just start off with this sort
of very big picture which is let's just
put on your energy analyst hat for a
second then we'll get into all this sort
of understanding Iran more, you know,
from your energy analyst hat, how
shocked are you by the sort of scale of
destruction that we've seen with energy
infrastructure over the last couple of
weeks?
>> So I think I'm shocked. I think I'm
officially shocked after the events of
the last 24 hours where you saw both
Israel attack
the South Pars gas field in Iran which
supplies 70% of Iran's gas supply
and then quite quickly within hours Iran
responding by striking the Ras Laffan
LNG processing facility in Qatar.
Uh but of course over the last few weeks
we've seen widespread
uh strikes on energy targets throughout
the region. And then of course the
closure of the Strait of Hormuz which as
you mentioned and I I've had very
similar experiences to Rory in this way
over the last few years whenever anybody
asked me, you know, is Iran going to
close the Strait of Hormuz? I would say
only as a last resort.
>> Mhm.
>> Only in the event that the regime fears
feels that its survival is being
threatened. And you know, most of the
time I've been saying we're not there
yet. You know, whatever crisis this is
it's it's not that bad. But this war
this attack was interpreted by Iran as a
threat to its survival, a threat to the
regime's survival. And it responded in a
way that it has been saying it would
respond for a long time. So I have been
shocked but if I were a better Iran and
energy analyst maybe I shouldn't have
been.
>> Well, okay, explain that further because
some people would say intuitively if you
strike Iran and immediately take out the
supreme leader that immediately frames
the conflict as an existential one for
Iran, right? So why this reluctance to
believe up until you know, maybe a day
or so ago that they would go this far in
their response?
>> Well, I I think the the kind of
collective understanding initially was
that even even though the war began with
Israel assassinating supreme leader Ali
Khamenei.
Um which incidentally the Iranians kind
of expected. They had been making plans
for for the last several months
of what to do in the event that Khamenei
was assassinated. Uh
but I think the collective understanding
of the war initially was that it was
going to be a short war because the
United States and because President
Donald Trump didn't want a long war. So
there was this belief that, "Okay,
things are bad. Iran has been attacked.
It's being heavily bombed by the US and
Israel. It's closing the Strait of
Hormuz, but Trump is going to
de-escalate and it's going to end."
Like, this this isn't going to turn into
a prolonged conflict. That's part of the
reason why oil prices didn't really
respond as aggressively initially as I
think they've responded since. Why, you
know, futures didn't move very much in
the first week or so of the war because
I think everyone was maybe in a state of
shock and denial that the situation was
as bad as it really was and that things
were going to be wrapped up, things were
going to be de-escalated. And I think on
some basis that was, you know, that was
stemming from historical experience.
Like, the war between Iran and Israel
last June was also very intense, but it
ended very quickly with a very, very
rapid ceasefire that allowed oil prices
to fall. And in the past, Iran had done
aggressive things. It had fired
missiles. It had related fired drones,
but usually in a calibrated, kind of
proportional way. And I think there was
Over the first week of the war, there
was this belief that, "Oh, Iran's not
going to go that far, right? That they
are going to Ultimately, they're going
to be deterred from being too
aggressive."
And I think on both sides, this
understanding that Trump was going to
de-escalate quickly and that Iran was
going to be restrained, both of those
assumptions proved to be very
inaccurate. And now that we're in the
third week of the war, I think it's
really settling in how bad this is, how
bad this is going to be, and how much
work it's going to take to de-escalate.
>> Well, you know, obviously a big part of
the reason that we want to talk to you
is we think that you have greater
insight into the sort of domestic
politics in Iran better than most energy
analysts that you're going to come
across. But actually, let me flip the
question and maybe not go to your
academic wheelhouse, but just your take.
You know, the expectation is Trump is
going to taco because he can't stand oil
at $100 or more and that this will prove
to be a forcing mechanism for him to one
day just declare victory. They'd all
say, "You know what? We've taken out
enough infrastructure, they're no longer
a threat." And as you mentioned, he
hasn't. And if anything, it seems like
we're bringing more assets to bear on
the region. So, this has taken by people
by surprise as of right now. Brent crude
trading for about 113, very close to the
crazy highs of Monday, April 9th or
sorry, Monday, March 9th. Do you have an
idea for why perhaps the collective
assumption of an imminent Trump taco has
not borne out and why he is actually
seems to be willing to accept some
economic pain and prolong this longer
than just a, you know, declaring victory
anytime?
>> Sure thing. I mean, the only the only
thing that's I will say, the only thing
that's somewhat more challenging
for an analyst in my position, more
challenging than diving into the
psychology of the Islamic Republic, is
diving into the psychology of Donald
Trump. But, I'm going to give it a shot.
Okay. So, so yeah, again, going off of
historical experience, here was an
individual, a person who'd been in the
public eye for decades, who always
seemed to be preoccupied by the price of
gasoline.
Like, you you go back over the last 30,
40 years, Trump is always talking about
gas prices, right? Keeping gas prices
low,
how gas prices have
you know, reflect poor governance, poor
economic performance. You got to keep
gas prices low if you want to be
successful. He talked about it a lot in
his first term. He talked about it a lot
last year coming up into this crisis.
Um and then suddenly, we're in the
context of a war.
Strait of Hormuz is closed. 20% of the
global oil supply is being disrupted or
shut in in some way. Gas prices are
climbing to highs that we haven't seen
in years. Oil is over 100. And then
suddenly, Trump is acting like that
doesn't matter.
Like he doesn't care. It's curious. I
think it comes down to a couple of
things. I think it comes down to
in this context, he is maybe more
conscious of looking weak
than taking the taco and taking the the
short-term win and seeing the the the
economic indicators, the financial
indicators swing back in his favor. I I
think the size and scale of this
uh conflict, the fact that it's it's not
just sort of the adventure in Venezuela
uh or or putting pressure on Russia.
It's it's it's a war. There are, you
know, dozens of US warships, hundreds of
planes, thousands of US personnel. Uh
GCC states, allies to the United States
that are under consistent fire. It It's
a It's a big deal. And to taco now would
also would not only I think expose the
president to criticism in a way that
maybe he hasn't been exposed over
previous foreign policy adventures where
he's he's always sort of a managed to
escape looking very tough, you know,
looking very assertive.
If he does back down right now, it feeds
directly into the Iranians' narrative of
victory.
>> Mhm.
>> This sense that Iran is tougher, more
resilient, more able to withstand pain,
and that eventually they will outlast
not only the United States, but more
specifically the US president. That is
entirely what is driving Iran's strategy
from the opening of the war.
>> Yeah, uh Joe, to Greg's point about
Donald Trump having a long history of
talking about oil prices, not many
people know that there is in fact a
deleted scene from Home Alone 2 in which
he stops to talk to Macaulay Culkin
about high prices at the pump.
>> Are you serious?
>> No.
>> Oh.
Yeah, they talk about gas taxes.
>> Yeah, that's right. They just, you know,
start rambling in the in in the hotel
halls. Um
Okay, I realize that this is
kind of a difficult question because I'm
not even sure that Trump himself knows,
but do you get a sense of what victory
actually looks like in his mind for this
particular situation?
>> There's been some good reporting on
this. So I I we can we can accept it as
as as fact. Although, it's irrelevant uh
for for the reasons I'll I'll state.
Going into this, there was a belief in
the administration, and perhaps a belief
from the president himself, that there
was an opportunity in Iran to replicate
the experience in Venezuela.
>> Mhm.
>> That there was a way to kill Ali
Khamenei, the supreme leader,
and that in the wake of his death,
a group of Iranian leaders would come to
the fore and would pursue policies that
aligned with US interests.
There was a belief that that was
possible. Now, the problem, which they
encountered immediately, was that the
individuals they expected to lead that
political shift inside Iran,
were also killed alongside Ali Khamenei
in the opening hours of the war. So, the
opening, the opportunity to achieve a
Venezuela,
disappeared in the opening hours,
>> Mhm.
>> leaving the president, I think, and the
United States with a a problem regarding
war goals. Now, they have done
tremendous damage to Iran's military
capabilities. Missiles, missile
stockpiles, missile productions, Iran's
navy, as the White House loves to to to
advertise, has been taking uh tremendous
damage.
So, Iran is absolutely being weakened by
this war,
but I don't know if that's enough for
the president to justify the war. The
war's scale, the economic cost, the
risks that were associated. If the war
ends with just
Trump saying, "We've weakened Iran.
We're not going to have to deal with
them again." That's insufficient because
he is probably getting advice inside the
White House and from the Pentagon that
if the war ends now, Iran will likely
rebuild.
You know, they rebuilt the damage that
was done to them uh following last
year's war. They rebuilt most of that
damage within 6 months. It'll probably
take them longer to rebuild the damage
from this war, but they will almost
certainly do it.
Also, So, the war ends now,
Iran will leave probably feeling
emboldened, having felt that their
strategy of targeting the straight,
targeting GCC states worked. So, the if
the war goal is just to weaken Iran
militarily, they've done that, but it's
probably insufficient. Right now, what I
imagine the president is thinking about
is how what can I do against Iran that
allows me to claim a more decisive
victory and offers me a politically and
also strategically viable off-ramp. The
problem I think they're dealing with
right now is that there are no good
options to pursue that outcome.
>> I'm trying to think about how to ask
this question in a way that doesn't um
well, that's accurate and a little bit
sensitive, but I have this feeling, this
sense, and I'm very far from an Iran
expert, an Iranian history expert, but I
have this sense
that Western commentators, particularly
older ones who perhaps sort of remember
the Cold War, etc.,
have this vision of Iranian society as
one in which there is a very broad mass
of people that are like deep down
liberals who are dying to cast off their
hijabs, who want to dance lasciviously
to rock music and live as Westerners,
etc., and that there is this very small
group of religious hardliners oppressing
them that have no credibility within
society, and that the moment you
decapitate these bearded mullahs, then
everyone will suddenly live the free
Western liberal life that they've been
longing to for decades, etc., and that
all you needed to do is to topple this
First of all, is that an accurate
characterization of how many sort of
think tank thinkers in DC view Iran, and
how different is that gap between the
complexities and realities of
essentially Iranian domestic politics.
>> Well, I I'll avoid naming names because
a lot of the think tank folks in DC are
friends of mine.
>> Okay.
>> But I will say this. I I you know, the
Secretary of State Marco Rubio likes to
say this a lot. I think it's a it's a
line that he thinks conveys meaning and
significance. I actually think he's
right. There is a huge gap between the
Iranian people and the Iranian regime,
the regime of the Islamic Republic.
There is There's overwhelming evidence
to suggest that most Iranians don't
support most of the policies that the
regime pursues.
>> Okay.
>> Both both the social policies at home,
very restrictive policies on how you can
dress, how you can act, the kinds of
businesses that cannot be operated.
There are laws prohibiting uh coed uh
activities. Increasingly, I should note
that a lot of these laws are being
flouted openly. Uh people are just
aren't obeying them anymore, and the
regime is having a hard time enforcing
them.
More broadly, there's resistance to a
lot of the policies the regime has
pursued. Uh backing foreign proxies or
regional proxies like Hezbollah or the
Houthis in Yemen, you know, spending
money propping up Assad in Syria,
spending huge amounts of money uh
building up building up a nuclear
program, which resulted in incredibly uh
onerous Western and US sanctions.
Um and then just the the general sense
that, you know, there are There are
elections in Iran, but they're not
really free or fair. Lots of candidates
that uh people would vote for are barred
from running for office. There are
candidates There are politicians who
have spoken out to on the subjects of
reform on democratization. They are
silenced. They're arrested uh
or or or put under house arrest. So,
it's an incredibly, you know,
restrictive political environment and
one that a lot of Iranians don't
support. On the sort of broader
ideological frame, there is a core of
support for the Islamic Republic as a
political experiment. There is still
this group of people inside the country.
It It's hard to estimate precisely their
size, but one estimate you can go on is
when there are elections for president,
for instance, there was one in 2024, the
super hardline candidate, the candidate
who is extremely anti-US, who's all for
doubling down on hijab and other tough
social policies, that candidate usually
gets 14 to 15 million votes.
And when the regime has, uh, you know,
demonstrations, when there are official
days of celebration, when they they come
out and they hold marches, very often
these marches are pretty well attended.
People do show up.
Uh, the regime can probably count on the
support of a hardcore of maybe 10 to 15
to 20% of the population.
>> Okay.
>> That's probably enough for them to stay
in power. The other aspect of this, and,
you know, this is
it's not a uniquely Iranian story.
Decades of repression and, you know,
monitoring, uh, political dissent,
restricting the political environment,
what that means is that there's really
no organized political opposition inside
Iran. There's no, you know, opposition
candidate or opposition leader who's,
you know, fighting the good fight. Uh,
there are some individuals, but they're
not really at the level that they could
organize an alternative government. The
other aspect of it is there are whole
institutions that are built into the
fabric of the Islamic Republic, the
IRGC, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps kind of being the most important,
but it's really just one of many, who
exist solely to preserve the regime from
internal and external threats.
They also happen to have all of the
guns.
So, as with other authoritarian
governments, not just today, but going
back, you know, 50, 60 years, this is an
environment, this is a a political
context where the mass of people don't
really support the government and would
love to see a different government, but
it's difficult for them to implement
change given the obstacles that they
face. And unfortunately, January was
illustrative of
all of those, uh, realities. The attempt
to
effect change through popular
demonstration was put down with
overwhelming and lethal force.
>> Just going back to Trump and potential
off-ramps here. I mean, one thing we
know about Trump is that he really seems
to like owning stuff, right? And he
seems to like
taking stuff that he doesn't necessarily
have explicit sovereignty over. Um and
there have been some rumblings recently
about possibly taking the Strait of
Hormuz and having some sort of coalition
with allies where they would control
that particular passage.
First of all, did you get the sense that
that's actually an off-ramp that he's
thinking seriously about? And then
secondly,
is that realistically an option for the
US to do given that its allies in
particular don't seem to be particular
fans of the Trump administration at this
moment in time?
>> Yeah, so on that, you know, it it does
still speak to this problematic context
that Trump finds himself in politically
and strategically. If he chooses to
de-escalate now, you know, it it I think
it makes him look quite weak if he
decides to end this war with Hormuz
still shut. And and worse than that,
with the Iranians allowing a certain
number of ships through, right? They've
been making bilateral deals with
Pakistan, with India to allow a couple
of ships through at a time,
demonstrating for all intents and
purposes that they control the Strait of
Hormuz, not the United States or or not
anyone else. I think it's very
problematic for Trump to decide to wind
down combat operations, wind down this
war against Iran, without having dealt
with the Strait in some way. The problem
is there are no good ways of doing that.
They're trying to degrade Iran's
capabilities,
you know, bombing its drones, bombing
its missiles to a point where ships will
feel comfortable moving through the
Strait, but it's taking them a long time
to do that because Iran has a lot of
missiles and it has a lot of drones, and
the geography of the Strait of Hormuz,
parts of it are extremely mountainous.
Uh Iran has spent decades building
positions to do this. I mean, again, it
speaks back to their strategy. They've
been preparing for this for a long time.
This is a war that they've been thinking
about fighting for a very long time. Uh
so it's it's taking the US a while to
weaken Iran to the point that the
tankers and the other ships feel
comfortable using the straight. On the
question of an international coalition,
you know, bringing in more states, more
countries, bringing in more ships would
make this easier.
The problem, of course, is that the
United States, the Trump administration,
doesn't have the best relationship with
most of its European allies. There was
an attempt initially to put together an
international group, to bring in the
French, bring in the British, bring in
others.
And the Europeans were initially on
board. The problem, though, is that that
shifted with Trump using this maybe as a
source of leverage of trying to get the
Europeans to actively join the war and
bomb the Iranians, not just protect
ships. Also using this to maybe move the
Europeans on issues like NATO funding,
on issues like Russia-Ukraine. And so
the Europeans moved from saying, "Okay,
we'll help you." to "You're on your
own."
You know, we'll come and help move ships
through the straight, but only if
there's de-escalation.
So it's another aspect of the kind of
strategic trap that the United States
finds itself in. It's fighting an enemy
who can't really be fully deterred or
degraded.
An enemy that is resisting being coerced
or forced into capitulating. An enemy
that can't undergo a political change
through decapitation. You know, like
they're killing leaders, but those
leaders are just being replaced, very
often by more hardline figures.
Um and the and the problems associated
with reopening the straight are just
proving to be
I think far more challenging than they
had expected. If they had expected to
deal with this at all, there's evidence
to suggest that the administration
didn't really think too much about
Hormuz when it launched this war.
>> You mentioned the European allies. Can
you talk to us just about the future of
America's relationship with some of the
the Gulf friends, the UAE, Saudi, etc.
and the degree to which this could
permanently alter the trajectory of that
relationship?
I mean, they didn't start this war and
now they're all they have all this
damage to their economy.
>> Exactly. Exactly. And it also, you know,
it speaks to the longer-term issues that
this war represents. Because if you
assume that the war is going to end in
some kind of limited fashion, right? The
Islamic Republic's not going to
collapse, there's not going to be a
regime change. Uh
the war is going to end with Iran still
having a couple of drones and missiles
left over, very weakened, but still
there. The issue for the GCC, for the
Gulf states, with that scenario, is that
it's extremely dangerous. They are now
facing uh a regional power that is
comfortable attacking them in
aggressively
if it gets attacked. Even if they had
nothing to do with it.
Uh and again, it's part of Iran's
strategy. They're trying to impose as
much as much pain as they can on
everybody in order to raise the costs of
this ever happening again. They're
thinking not only about this war, but
they're thinking about future wars.
They're trying to restore deterrence.
And this puts the GCC states in a very,
very awkward position. On the one hand,
many of them would like to see this war
end more conclusively, with the threat
of Iran not just degraded, but
neutralized. Because leaving it in place
is so dangerous to them.
On the other hand, they likely know that
that's impossible.
That this isn't going to end with regime
change. So, what do they do? I think,
counterintuitively in the short term,
most of them are going to pursue closer
relationships with the United States,
because they have no other choice.
They need to improve their security.
Most of them right now are relying on US
support for their air defenses. They
need the US to restock their supply of
interceptors. They need the US to help
them shoot down Iranian drones, Iranian
missiles. Um also, historically, all of
the states of the GCC depend on the
United States for protection. You know,
they have their own militaries. They are
generally not regarded as being
extremely capable.
Uh so, they do need uh ties to the US to
secure themselves. And this war has if
anything made that relationship with the
US all the more important. But, that's
not enough. Because they've now seen
that if the US attacks Iran, they will
be on the front lines. So, they're
likely going to have to balance that
somehow. They're likely going to have to
balance that by per- perhaps pursuing
closer relationships with each other.
You know, there was already kind of some
momentum before this war on regional
security relationships. Saudi and Egypt
becoming closer, the UAE and Israel
pursuing closer ties. Uh Saudi and
Pakistan have a mutual defense treaty
now. They like they they will come to
each other's protection. They will come
to each other's aid if they're attacked.
Although, Pakistan is not attacking Iran
even though Iran is attacking Saudi
Arabia. So, the full value of that
agreement is maybe somewhat suspect.
But, that's that I think is an another
potential uh avenue that they may go
down. They may look to one another to
improve their security rather than
depending on the United States, which is
proving to be in the short term a
crucial ally, but in the long term a
very problematic partner.
>> So, on that note, why did Iran actually
decide to go after countries that did
not attack them? You know, Gulf
countries ex- Israel and um other than
the United States. Because again, like
it's never really done this before and
the expectations certainly of people who
moved to places like Dubai and Abu Dhabi
and I count myself in that bracket was
that Iran probably wasn't going to ever
target them.
>> It relates to Iran's broader strategy.
Not only its strategy for surviving this
war, but its strategy for improving its
deterrence and reducing the possibility
of this happening again, of future
attacks. The The bigger scenario that
the Iranians are more concerned about is
a scenario where Iran turns into
Lebanon, or Iran turns into Syria, a
country that you can just bomb, that
Israel can just bomb whenever it wants
to.
They're very, very concerned about that
becoming the new status quo.
So, that is what's driving their
strategy. They want to restore
deterrence. And their way of doing that
is indicating to everyone
the United States, Israel, the GCC, but
the entire world that attacking us is
not worth it.
That we will respond by imposing more
pain, more costs on you than you can
impose on us. The Iranians love to
demonstrate this. They love to talk
about this. And I think they are
illustrating it, that they are more
resilient, that they can take the hit,
that it doesn't matter that the US and
Israel have air superiority over Iran.
It doesn't matter that they're killing
leaders or or striking targets in the
hundreds, in the thousands, that at the
end of the day
the Iran the Iranian government, the
Iranian military is more resilient and
can outlast any of its competitors. Now,
the reason why they're striking the GCC
is there there two reasons for this.
One, more immediately,
the GCC is a more tempting target. These
are soft targets. Energy infrastructure,
it's fairly easy to do damage to a level
that causes the facilities to have to be
shut down for repairs.
The GCC do have air defenses, but the
targets the Iranians have been going
after are not hardened
uh in the way that, you know, US bases
or Israel uh are hardened. Israel is
extremely well defended with its
multi-layered air defense systems, with
its civil defense, you know, systems.
Israel is is is kind of a fortress state
in many ways because it it has sort of
uh lived under the threat of of outside
attack for so long. The GCC isn't like
that.
And on top of that, it speaks directly,
Tracy, to what you're saying. The
Iranians are trying to show the GCC
states, and particularly the UAE, your
model of economic development, this idea
that you can turn the Gulf into an
island of stability with tourism, with
finance, with tech, with hotels,
all of that will go away
if we attacked.
>> Mhm.
>> If the US and Israel keep bombing us, we
are going to turn the Gulf into a live
fire zone, and eventually that will make
your economic development plans
impossible to achieve. So, they're
imposing all these pain, they're
imposing all these costs. The second
reason they're doing this is they are
indicating to the GCC that their
relationship with the United States is
untenable. That so long as they allow
the US to have bases in the region, so
long as they allow the US to support
their security, that from the point of
view of Iran, they are US allies,
they're US instruments, and that makes
them legitimate targets.
>> Yeah, Joe, just on the UAE, I think this
is a really important point to stress,
because I think a lot of people don't
realize that they're not seeing
everything that's happening in places
like Dubai and Abu Dhabi at the moment,
because you have, you know, very strict
state control
>> Yeah.
>> on the images that are allowed to come
out there. And in fact, I think we've
seen at least one person arrested for
sharing a photo of a drone strike or
something like that. So, stuff is
happening there, and it's stuff that if
you're an expat who came to that city
thinking that it is safe and secure,
you never really would have imagined.
>> By the way, headline breaking just now
from Reuters, Iran's attacks damage 17%
of Qatar's LNG capacity for three to
five years. So, this is a this is pretty
extraordinary. Greg, tell us about Kharg
Island.
I'd never heard of it before a week ago.
>> It's a place that's very close to my
heart, Joe, because it it is it it's
it's I researched a little bit about it
when I wrote my book, uh which is all
about, you know, the '50s, the '60s, the
sort of origins of Iran's oil industry.
I didn't get around actually mentioning
it though, unfortunately. I I think I
had to cut that reference for for for
for space, you know.
>> when that happens, yeah.
>> I know, it's a real it's a real bummer.
>> I just heard Kharg Island is the name of
like a legend like for the for thousands
of years invaders have tried to take
Kharg Island. It has that sort of sound
like great powers all like taking the
knee at Well, anyway, tell us what Kharg
Island is. Yeah, every every all the
great civilizations have met their
demise on Kharg Island. It has that sort
of sound like great powers all like
taking the knee at Well, anyway, tell us
what Kharg Island is.
>> Oh, sure. Their their ghosts haunt the
the beaches to this very day.
>> Um so, Kharg Island is a very small
island. It's It's It's uh smaller than
Manhattan.
Uh it's just off the coast of Iran,
about 50 mi off the coast. It's at the
north end of the Persian Gulf. Uh so, a
little bit close to uh to to Kuwait, uh
that that that neighborhood. And it is
Iran's uh principal oil exporting
terminal. Uh it handles around 80 to 90%
of Iran's crude exports. Iran exports
around 1.5 1.6 million barrels a day.
Almost all of it goes through Kharg.
And there are kind of two big reasons
for that because Iran does have other
export ports that it can export crude
products, LPG from. Kharg is the big
one. The two reasons for it is it's uh
designed to handle VLCCs, the biggest uh
oil tankers. It has uh several births
that can handle, I think, up to seven
tankers at a time. So, it's a very large
facility. It was originally built
incidentally, it was built in the early
1960s by Western companies that were
active in Iran at the time, uh
specifically because it was favorable
for birthing the largest tankers. Hm.
So, that's what it was originally
designed for. It's also close to Iran's
main oil fields. So, it it's fed by a
number of pipelines from the coast that
bring crude directly from Iran's major
oil fields in the province of Khuzestan
in Southwest Iran. So, geographically
it's well positioned.
The facilities there are designed to
handle a lot of oil better than any
other facility in Iran, and that's what
makes it so important. And that's why
the US is so interested in it. Because
there is a a belief, there is a theory
that if you seize Kharg Island,
or if you destroy it, but I think
they're thinking more about taking it,
then you have sufficient leverage over
Iran that you can get them to do what
you want because you've cut off their
financial lifeline. You've eliminated
their ability to export oil, ergo, they
will be forced to do what you want in
order to start exporting oil again.
That's the thinking. The problem I have
with that theory is that I don't think
it's right.
>> All right, say more.
>> Okay. So, first of all, as I mentioned,
Iran has other means of exporting oil.
It has other export terminals. There's
one at the town of Jask, east of the
Strait of Hormuz, that the Iranians have
built up
precisely because they're concerned
about their reliance on Kharg. It's
smaller, but it can still handle
probably about a million barrels a day
with the other terminals operating. So,
if they lose Kharg, they can still
export crude. But let's say that the US
goes all out and takes out all these
terminals, right? Either bombs them or
sends in the Marines to, you know, storm
the beaches and seize the terminals, and
Iran suddenly can't export any oil from
these ports.
Iran still has a limited capability of
exporting oil by rail. They have a rail
link with Russia. They're trying to
build out a rail link with China. Now,
they can't move much,
but open-source and Iranian media has
revealed that they have several hundred
oil tanker cars that are sufficient for
moving
probably the equivalent of 100 to
150,000 barrels of oil a day if they
were running all out.
The other element of this is is that
Iran has, because it's been operating
under sanction for so long, Iran, or I
should say the regime, has means of
moving oil that are not as easily
observed. So, oil gets smuggled out,
particularly through Iraq.
Uh it gets loaded onto smaller tankers
and smuggled out. The Iran has a very,
very large refining base, and it's been
very profitable for uh groups attached
to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
to buy crude inside Iran, refine it, and
then smuggle it out of the country and
sell it for huge profits, because uh oil
is subsidized inside Iran, so you can
get it for virtually nothing, and then
you can sell it in other So, there's
other ways that they can move energy and
move oil without having to rely on
Kharg. A lot of those ways are
controlled by the IRGC,
which would probably become even more
powerful in the event that Iran loses
Kharg, because suddenly they have
greater control over a smaller fiscal
pie.
Uh and this also speaks to the
psychology of the event. The Americans,
I think, assume, or perhaps elements of
the Trump administration assume, "Oh, if
we take Kharg, then they have to do what
we say, because they're going to want to
export oil again." I think that
misunderstands the the uh
let's say psychological characteristics
of not only the Islamic Republic, but
also of the Iranian state.
They will respond extremely negatively
to US soldiers on Iranian soil.
They will respond very negatively to any
overt attempt to force capitulation. And
I think
it's certainly for the short term, and
probably for the medium and long term as
well, they would rather live under
greater financial pressure and an
inability to export oil in volume than
to capitulate to a US
uh
uh pressure campaign that involves the
invasion of Iranian territory.
>> Mhm. I This reminds me of something that
I wanted to ask um exactly on this
point, which is I I one of the like
under-appreciated um facts of this
particular situation is that Iran's been
sanctioned for a while
>> Yeah.
>> and this gray market infrastructure
already exists.
And so I'm curious, but assuming that if
the US were to try to crack down on some
of that sanctioned oil and the way it
actually gets out of the country,
would you expect that gray market system
to start to break? Or would you expect
to see it sort of like
I guess maybe formalized to an extent or
grow even stronger in the face of US
pressure like on Kharg Island?
>> Well, it's it's been a long-running
dilemma for the United States um which
is, you know, how to make sanctions work
on Iran. I mean, part of the I think
part of the reason why we're now in a
shooting war with Iran is because
sanctions didn't work. Sanctions were
designed to change Iran's behavior, to
force them to make concessions. Iran
find found ways around the sanctions,
refused to make concessions, and the US
uh felt I think compelled to some extent
to use military force. Although I think
there were lots of other reasons uh
uh on top of that. If the US were to,
let's say, take Kharg, but also to try
to really vigorously eliminate
uh Iran's ability to export oil. First
of all, I think it would have to be
pretty comprehensive, and I think it
would have to be pretty aggressive, and
it would have to be sustained for quite
a while, right? Patrolling Iran's
coastline, it's about 1,200 km long.
Stopping any and all ships that are
trying to exit Iran's export terminals.
Uh clamping down on overland routes.
Iran uh smuggles oil through Iraq. It
also smuggles a certain amount of oil
through Turkey and into the Caucasus,
and into Pakistan. Uh the that trade is
much more difficult for the US to
interdict. So, and that's where a lot of
this illicit kind of gray market
activity happens on top of the black
market activity. So, I I think the
upshot of trying to cut off the flow of
oil
with the means that the US has,
including military force and
interdiction, only incentivizes the
Iranians to turn to these alternative
routes. At the same time, what you're
doing on the market level is you're
putting more upward pressure on prices.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. You're create You're creating an
environment of higher prices, which only
further incentivize incentivizes gray
and black market activity, because now
the profits are even better.
>> It's interesting the any country that
has some heavily subsidized domestic
price of anything, we're going to keep
the domestic price of gasoline or oil
well below the global market price. I
mean, that is bananas up for
smugglers, right? I mean, like that must
be just like I the more you press that
button, the greater the incentive is for
someone to find that and move it onto
the world market. I mean, I think this
was, of course, a story in the sort of
late Soviet era. You have these like
price controls, and then you have these
quasi-state companies just absolutely
making a fortune finding a way to like,
you know, bring the locally made sell
the locally made toaster in Europe or
whatever it is. Just make a fortune. I
hadn't really thought about that though
in the context of Iranian oil.
All right, let's just go back to the
pure energy question. Cam mentioned the
damage that we've already seen in just a
few weeks of the war to
LNG exports and etc.
Um you know,
there there has been this obvious
mismatch in expectations. A lot of
people think uh Trump would fold.
Perhaps the reason oil isn't higher
currently right now is still the sort of
embedded expectation that Trump can't
take this much longer.
What can you know, let's just say it
goes on. Like how bad could this get?
And do you think that there is like
uh
Do you think that still today the price
of oil reflects perhaps an unrealistic
expectation that this war is going to
end soon? And how much does do things
just compound and metastasize the longer
this goes on, and where might we see the
price of some of this stuff? What does
it look like in your crystal ball?
>> So, I I think expectations are
definitely shifting or or have shifted
to the belief that this is likely going
to go on for a while, and that the
supply effect is now such that prices
are going to stay high for the rest of
this year. High relative to what we
thought that they would be, right? When
we entered 2026, there was this broad
expectation that this was going to be a
pretty soft market, that there was going
to be an imbalance of supply over
demand. Demand growth was going to be
pretty soft, pretty sluggish, and that
was going to keep prices low. It's going
to keep them in the 60s, maybe in the
50s uh per barrel. That is all changed
now. I I think seeing oil prices fall
below $75 a barrel by the end of the
year
uh is pretty unlikely, even if this
conflict wraps up very quickly. I mean,
what looking at the looking at three
things.
Uh the the the front month the Brent
front month being at about 113 112, I
think that's approaching
realistic expectations because Hormuz is
still closed
because some amount of crude is getting
out via Saudi and UAE pipelines, but
those pipelines are vulnerable, and they
could be disrupted. And as we've seen,
the Iranians have the ability to do
pretty significant damage to energy
infrastructure if they really go for it.
I mean, Joe, you mentioned the damage
done to the the Qatar facility last
night. That was, I believe, one missile
that got through
and caused enough damage that they'll
have to keep the facility off for a long
time, and has now cut production for for
years
uh to some extent. Uh so, that's that's
one missile, and they could I think they
could do more if they wanted. They could
go after tankers more aggressively.
Like, they're they're they're keeping
their powder dry in the Strait of Hormuz
to to for the most part, right? They're
usually they're mostly operating off of
threats.
So, if if things were to get worse,
which they very well could, prices could
go higher. The other uh price point to
look at is uh spot price for physical
cargos coming out of the region, right?
If the Brent front month is around 111,
and that's the future.
Uh that's the futures.
A price of the price of a barrel of
Omani crude right now, you go to Oman,
you buy a barrel of oil, is over $150 a
barrel. That's the premium that's now
being placed on Middle East production
out of Oman, out of the UAE, and those
prices are coming through Asia, and the
Asians are now bidding up the price of
oil coming from other markets. You're
going to start seeing that reflected
elsewhere, right? Oil coming out of the
US is going to start ticking up, oil
coming out of uh you know, other
production hubs is going to start
ticking up. The final point that I would
say, the final sort of price point that
I would look at is when you look at the
curve, when you look at prices over the
next 12 months,
all of them are higher than they were a
week ago, and they're still coming up.
They're still rising. The expectations
are that this isn't going to end soon,
and even if it does, the size of the
physical disruption that we've seen so
far is going to create constraints on
supply going through the next 12 months,
and that's even with releases from
strategic petroleum reserves, right? The
US releasing oil, other IEA members
releasing oil. That's going to relieve
the That's going to relieve the pressure
somewhat, but at the same time, those
are stockpiles that are going to have to
be refilled.
>> Mhm.
>> And I think everybody is going to be
very concerned about having a low
inventory of oil when this war is over,
because everyone's going to be thinking
about this Is this happening again?
If the Iranians survive, which they are
likely to.
>> Doesn't it take a while for oil released
from the SPR to actually get into the
market, which I think is also under
appreciated?
>> Yes, it's slow. It's a slow process. The
US can only They say that they can
release 1.4 million barrels a day. It's
probably more like 1 million barrel a
day, and it eats into US crude export
capacity. So, if you're releasing oil
from the SPR, you're kind of holding
back on crude exports from commercial
producers, because they all kind of They
all come out of the same infrastructure.
The SPR releases are more a signal.
They're more a a saying like to
inventories, you know, here's oil that
will be on the market over the next 3 to
4 months to make up for a physical
shortfall, an actual shortfall of
supply.
Uh because if there weren't SPR releases
and everyone was just forced to eat the
supply loss, which is approximately 10
million barrels a day right now, I mean
that's 10% of global supply that is just
not getting to where it needs to go.
>> So, I just have one last question. Since
the theme of this conversation or one of
the themes has been this idea of
hypotheticals turning into reality, just
going back to the old Strait of Hormuz
closure thought experiment that probably
everyone in oil and gas has has
dedicated some time to in recent
decades, is there anything about now
that it's actually happening, is there
anything about the situation that has
surprised you as it's been playing out?
>> You know, honestly, what's been
surprising to me, two things that have
been surprising to me, um how little the
Iranians have needed to do to Hormuz to
keep it shut.
They've struck about a dozen tankers.
They haven't sunk any as far as I know.
They haven't laid more than a few mines
as far as anyone is aware.
Uh activity at Hormuz has been pretty
quiet because as soon as the war began
and as soon as the Iranians said Strait
of Hormuz is now closed, all the
shippers stopped.
Nothing nothing was moving. The threat
was enough to keep it closed, which I I
I thought was surprising. The second
surprising point, and this kind of feeds
into the first, is that I was told, my
understanding was that this was a
scenario the US Navy had prepared for,
they had lots of plans in place, they
knew what they needed to do to keep
Hormuz open in the event that the
Iranians tried to shut it. And then the
Iranians shut the Strait of Hormuz and
the US response has been
insufficient.
It not only It's not only they haven't
like done enough to open the strait,
it's that they didn't seem to have
expected this at all.
That that the Iranians would respond to
this kind of of an attack with by
playing their principal Trump card. So,
between the effectiveness of the Iranian
strategy and the lack of a strong US
response, a strong US effective response
has been really surprising to me.
>> Greg Brew, uh fascinating conversation.
Love catching up with you. Truly the
perfect guest. Thank you so much for
coming back on Odd Lots.
>> Thank you so much for having me back.
>> Greg's just the best.
>> So good.
>> He's so good. I mean, you know, all of
our guests are perfect guests.
>> That's right. That's right.
>> But Greg is a Greg is a perfect guest.
>> Truly the perfect guest.
No, that was a fascinating conversation.
I mean, I think he laid out very clearly
the strategic difficulties that the US
now faces. And actually, you know, you
mentioned um Kharg Island sounding like,
you know, a place where great powers
like
>> Caesar met his demise at Kharg Island.
Alexander the Great, you know, whatever.
>> So, I was thinking like one of the
things that still amazes me is that
geography still matters in the world,
right? Like you have all this high-tech
high-tech missiles, high-tech drones,
but actually we're still limited by
geography in many ways.
>> Yeah, you know, it it uh I had that
thought when he mentioned how
mountainous the area is around the
Strait of Hormuz and it's like, okay,
why can't the US simply take out Iran's
capacity to fire drones and missiles at
the ships going through? Well, it's
heavily fortified deep in the mountains
in the area, not easy to spot, not easy
to target, etc. So, yes, geography,
geology, etc. extremely important uh to
this question.
>> The other thing I was thinking
this is a very serious conversation and
this is not an a very serious comment,
but you know, he mentioned um very large
crude carriers, VLCCs. I love how
literal that name is. Whenever I hear
anyone mention that, I just think like
there was a guy one day who invented the
ship, and he was like, "You know what?
We're not going to call it like a brig
or a schooner or something. We're just
going to call it what it is, a very
large crude carrier."
>> That is very funny, actually.
You know, I think look, there was a lot
there. The other thing, and I think it
was the last point, is this idea that,
and it's sort of ominous, which is
everyone sort of assumed that the Navy
would have had a straight of Hormuz
plan, given the amount of time and
energy that's been thought about
contingencies and what a disaster this
would be.
>> And yet
>> And then it closes, and then it's like,
"Oh, what? What are we doing? We're
going to have a plan." You know, it's
very Everything so felt so far is we are
planning to have a plan, and so forth.
And so, the idea that you start this war
with at least the possibility of the
strait being closed, and then it's
closed, and you basically do nothing,
and nothing passes at all. Um, pretty
worrisome on I suppose both a sort of
immediate and long-term level about what
that the state of planning, and then the
state of military capacity for what
should have been at least a uh a
possibility understood from the very
beginning.
>> Yes. And also, there's just an asymmetry
at play here, which is like every day
that goes on that sees some significant
energy asset, whether it's in Iran or in
Qatar or elsewhere in the Gulf region,
that like echoes for months, right?
Like, the daily time frame for those
assets getting destroyed is very short.
So, just in two or three weeks, we've
seen a lot of stuff get damaged. But,
the time frame for the actual impacts of
all of that to come to fruition and
ripple throughout the economy are very,
very long.
>> Yes.
>> And so, I I just think like the with
every day this goes on, with every
additional bit of infrastructure damage,
it just gets worse and worse.
>> worse and worse. And as you said, these
are one missile, right? And in some of
these instances, and you're talking
about years of damage to infrastructure,
which is pretty ominous for any sort of
expectation that
again, Trump could talk to, right? He
could declare war and still talk about
years of repercussions from this. So, um
yeah, it's pretty serious consequences
to all of this.
>> All right. Um on that note, shall we
leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our guest
Gregory Brew. He's at GBrew24.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman, Dash Bennett at Dash Bot,
and Caleb Brooks at Caleb Brooks.
>> And for more Odd Lots content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at bloomberg.com/odd
lots.
>> And you can chat about all of these
topics 24/7 in our Discord,
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.